Add exit tutorial ObolNetwork/obol-docs#124 (#157)
ObolNetwork/obol-docs: docs/int/quickstart/quickstart-exit.md

---
sidebar_position: 6
description: Exit a validator
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Exit a validator

:::caution
Charon is in an early alpha state and is not ready to be run on mainnet.
:::

Exiting your validator keys can be useful in situations where you want to stop staking and withdraw your staked ETH.

## Pre-requisites

- A quorum of operators needs to run the same exit command for the exit to succeed.
- If any of the charon nodes restart after the exit command is run, it will lose the partial exit and you will have to begin again.

## Step 1. Set the `EXIT_EPOCH`

> Set the `EXIT_EPOCH` environment variable to the epoch number at which you want to exit. For example, if you want to exit at epoch 112260, enter the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm the earliest `EXIT_EPOCH` to use for your validators. Assuming you want to exit as soon as possible, the default epoch of `112260` is sufficient.
```

    
    export EXIT_EPOCH=112260

> ## Step 2. Run the `voluntary-exit` command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 2. Run the `voluntary-exit` command on your validator client
```

> Run the following voluntarily exit the validator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the appropriate command to broadcast an exit message from your validator client to its upstream charon client.

:::tip
This command should be executed on your running validator client, not your charon client. It needs to be the validator client that is connected to your charon client taking part in the Distributed Validator Cluster, and not a standalone VC connected to a different consensus layer client, as you are only signing a partial exit message, with a partial private key share, which charon will combine with the other partial exit messages from the other operators in the cluster before broadcasting to the consensus layer when it valid. 
:::
```

<Tabs groupId="validator-clients">
  <TabItem value="teku" label="Teku" default>
    <pre>
      <code>
    {String.raw`docker exec -ti charon-distributed-validator-node-teku-1 /opt/teku/bin/teku voluntary-exit \
    --beacon-node-api-endpoint="http://charon:3600/" \
    --confirmation-enabled=false \
    --validator-keys="/opt/charon/validator_keys:/opt/charon/validator_keys" \
    --epoch=$\{EXIT_EPOCH:-112260}`}
      </code>
    </pre>
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="lighthouse" label="Lighthouse">
    <pre>

>       <code>

Author: @LukeHackett12 is this correct for Lighthouse?

    {String.raw`docker exec -ti charon-distributed-validator-node-lighthouse-1 /opt/lighthouse/lighthouse validator exit \
    --beacon-node "http://charon:3600/" \
    --validator-dir "/opt/charon/validator_keys" \
    --epoch $\{EXIT_EPOCH:-112260}`}
      </code>
    </pre>
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="nimbus" label="Nimbus">
    <pre>

>       <code>

Reviewer: No idea if its correct for nimbus or lighthouse, let's comment them out and merge only the teku one for now, because that is the default VC we run in `charon-distributed-validator-node`, so will apply to >80% for now.

    {String.raw`docker exec -ti charon-distributed-validator-node-nimbus-1 /opt/nimbus-eth2/build/nimbus_beacon_node validator_exit \
    --rpc="http://charon:3600/" \
    --validators-dir="/opt/charon/validator_keys" \
    --exit-epoch=$\{EXIT_EPOCH:-112260}`}
      </code>
    </pre>
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

> Once a threshold of exit signatures has been reached, charon will submit the exit transaction to the beacon chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a threshold of exit signatures has been received by any single charon client, it will craft a valid exit message and will submit it to the beacon chain for inclusion.
```
